Version control systems allow us to track changes to our project’s code, collaborate more easily, and roll back any inadvertent errors (such as accidentally deleting files). Knowing how to use a version control system is a required skill for every software developer.
There are many options for version control, Git is a distributed version control system originally developed by Linus Torvalds to host the Linux kernel. Git is a large subject, and we’ll only be scratching the surface in this post, but there are many good free resources online. Putting your source code under version control with Git is strongly recommended, not only because it’s nearly a universal practice in software development, but also because it will allow you to share your code more easily and easily as well to deploy your application at several PaaS providers.

##Installation and setup

The first step is to install Git if you haven’t yet do it then follow the steps in this [post](/post/20131116_install_ruby).

After installing Git, you should perform a set of one-time setup steps, again if you haven't do it yet check this [post](/post/20131117_setup_git).

##First-time repository setup

Now we come to some steps that are necessary each time you create a new repository. First navigate to the root directory of the first app and initialize a new repository:

    $ git init

The next step would be to add the project files to the repository. There’s a minor complication, though: by default Git tracks the changes of all the files, but there are some files we don’t want to track. For example, log files to record the behavior of the application; these files change frequently, and we don’t want our version control system to have to update them constantly. Git has a simple mechanism to ignore such files: simply include a file called **.gitignore** in the application root directory with some rules telling Git which files to ignore. Here is an example:

    # Ignores the whole .gs hiden directory
    /.gs
    # Ignore vim backup files
    *~
    # Ignore my environment configuration file
    env.sh
    # Ignore the weird .DS_Store directories created by the Mac Finder application
    .DS_Store

Here we have few example, to ignore files, which live in the .gs/ directory we use /.gs, to ignore all files that end in ~ we use *~. Most of these ignored files change frequently and automatically or are just relevant to our environmetn, so including them under version control is unnecessary. Moreover, when collaborating with others, these irrelevant changes can cause frustrating conflicts.

##Adding and committing

Finally, we’ll add the files to Git and then commit the results. You can add all the files (apart from those that match the ignore patterns in .gitignore) as follows:

    $ git add .

Here the dot ‘.’ represents the current directory, and Git is smart enough to add the files recursively, so it automatically includes all the subdirectories. This command adds the project files to a staging area, which contains pending changes to your project; you can see which files are in the staging area using the status command:

    $ git status
    # On branch master
    #
    # Initial commit
    #
    # Changes to be committed:
    #   (use "git rm --cached <file>..." to unstage)
    #
    #       new file:   README.md
    .
    .
    .

(The results may be long, so I’ve used vertical dots to indicate omitted output.)

To tell Git you want to keep the changes, use the commit command:

    $ git commit -m "Initial commit"
    [master (root-commit) df0a62f] Initialize repository
    2 files changed, 461 insertions(+), 0 deletions(-)
    create mode 100644 README.md
    .
    .
    .

The -m flag lets you add a message for the commit; if you omit -m, Git will open the editor you set and you have to enter the message there.

It is important to note that Git commits are local, recorded only on the machine on which the commits occur. This is in contrast to the popular open-source version control system called Subversion, in which a commit necessarily makes changes on a remote repository. Git divides a Subversion-style commit into its two logical pieces: a local recording of the changes (git commit) and a push of the changes up to a remote repository (git push). We’ll see an example of the push step later.

By the way, you can see a list of your commit messages using the log command:

    $ git log
    commit df0a62f3f091e53ffa799309b3e32c27b0b38eb4
    Author: Michael Hartl <michael@michaelhartl.com>
    Date:   Thu Oct 15 11:36:21 2009 -0700

      Initial commit

To exit git log, you may have to type q to quit.

